[Music]
welcome to signals and threads in-depth
conversations about every layer of the
tech stock from Jan street I'm Ron
Minsky it's my pleasure to introduce
Aaron Murphy who's a ux designer here at
Jane Street Aaron does a lot of
interesting work here and also has a
really interesting and varied background
she's worked at NASA's jet propulsion
laboratory which is not a place I knew
hired ux designers worked as a design
consultant on her own founded her own
independent design studio is also a
talented illustrator who has her own
quarterly journal and has done a lot of
exciting design work here so thanks for
joining me thank you so much for having
me so I just love the fact that you
worked to the JPL it ties deeply into
some of the things that I think are
interesting about the kind of ux
projects we have here because I imagine
the GPL is a place that's designing for
Experts of various kinds and a lot of
the kind of design work not quite all of
it but a lot of it here is also focused
on various kinds of experts anyway I'm
just super curious how did you get to
the JPL I had the same thought I think
when I was in school that in my head
those who went to NASA jet propulsion
laboratory were engineers they were
scientists they were roboticists
designer was just something that did not
seem like it kind of fit into that
sphere and I certainly when I joined JPL
I feel in a lot of ways that I kind of
lucked out there was an individual who
was working there that really wanted to
bring human- centered design thinking to
the way that we design spacecraft and
the way that we think about operating
spacecraft and it was early enough stage
where there was not as many design
schools at the time that were focused on
interaction design and user experience
which was the thing that I was studying
in school and so it happened that they
reached out to the school and at the
time I was actually working with a
professor at the University of
Washington that was really interested in
thinking about how design principles and
thinking how do you test and iterate on
user interfaces with a person how could
that fit into more techn environments
not just consumer products so there was
already some exposure that I was getting
just working with that professor and
working on a project for cockp pick
designs with Boeing where I was actually
starting to see a similarity of creating
storyboards thinking about what a person
is thinking about when they are
navigating a digital system that for me
was like oh I see the wein the weigh-in
was actually like knowing the right
individuals who are looking for that
type of talent when you talk about this
process of building and designing things
with humans involved in that process is
that kind of what you mean when you talk
about human Center design yes I think
there is this instead of just going off
of the idea of what kind of thing we
want to build out or thinking
exclusively about the system itself but
actually talking with an individual and
interviewing them and having one-on-one
chance to discuss what they're trying to
achieve with the tool that's what I
typically find myself doing so when you
got to JPL what were the actual kind of
projects you were working on how did JPL
come around to thinking they need needed
someone to focus on design you kind of
mentioned there was someone there who
championed the idea but in what kind of
context what kind of projects were being
worked on I think one of the first
projects that I was working on actually
was to help scientists actually access
orbital data from Earth orbiting
missions there was an interest in
creating some web portal and doing it in
a way where it's not like the standard I
guess catalog that a lot of scientists
were used to where you didn't have as
much insight into maybe like the
metadata it a real laborious process to
find the right kind of data and you'd
have to go to all sorts of different
sites or know the right kind of people
who had that data available on some kind
of USB or could send it to you directly
on an email and so at the time the very
first project I had a chance to work on
was trying to consolidate into one data
portal all of the earth based
information that JPL was collecting and
make it more accessible for a wider
audience of researchers you said
earth-based dat is that like geospatial
information about the Earth itself about
the moon about like what's the data sets
mostly Earth and specifically like CO2
concentration and just understanding the
composition of our atmosphere and so
there was different data products that
were available to people and we wanted
to create kind of a workflow and
experience for people to know what level
of data there's some processing that
might go into the actual data itself and
we wanted to create a UI that displayed
that level a lot more clearly we wanted
to organize it in a way that you knew
exactly which satellite they were
pulling data from or if there was an
actual like data center on Earth that
was collecting information that they
could then maybe compare against so you
wanted there surface both the data and
the Providence essentially of where the
data came from yeah exactly what were
the challenges in figuring out how to
put this all together as you sit down
with Scientists at JPL or trying to do
something what were the things you
learned that surprised you and informed
the kind of work you were doing I think
it was really hard to be a new designer
and then also design for experts within
a domain I had absolutely no familiarity
with you hadn't previously studied
astrophysics before going to JPL I
really hadn't I think the most that I
got from my experience in school that
kind of prepared me for this was
probably working with a lot of the
students within the engineering program
and just kind of getting a sense of how
they think about problems that are
slightly different from designers and
the big takeaway from that is just how
to ask questions and just how to kind of
unpack an environment that I'm not
familiar with and I think that's one of
the sharpest tools that JPL really
equipped me with as a designer was just
to be comfortable in spaces where the
domain is unclear or not as exactly
relatable for someone like myself who's
not an expert and then have the tools to
just be interested and ask questions
without any fear of looking silly or
maybe asking something that seems too
basic in retrospect I think I can
actually still go to this website for
all this orbital data but to go back and
look at the design now it's like a
pretty I think straightforward problem
space that I would do totally
differently but in addition to trying to
think about like how do we make sense of
all the data products that a scientists
would want to have access to and might
want to look through and use for their
research how do you build a tool and
that was just something at that time in
my career I just did not have a lot of
insight into and so it was a lot of just
giving it a try asking a lot of
questions I did a lot of interviews with
different scientists from what I
remember there was like this convention
where all these scientists who were
studying the Earth's atmosphere actually
came to kind of like a conference local
to JPL at the Caltech school and I was
able to just sit in the crowd not really
understand what was going on in the
presentation slide deck but was able to
kind of take notes and follow up with
people in that group and just introduce
myself as a ux designer trying to create
this sort of data portal and there was a
lot of very interested and happy
participants who are willing to give me
insight into their work and I think it's
a that even Beyond some of the
earth-based work that I was doing at JPL
once I started getting into more of the
Mars rover missions that same level of
how do you understand a domain and
understand what a person's trying to
achieve within that domain the skills I
was picking up from just talking with
these researchers really translated well
and that's I think something that it's
really a key element to the way I do a
lot of my design work at Jam Street as
well just really understanding what are
people trying to do what is their ual
domain and not being too afraid to dig
into some of the technical details of
that so you talked a lot about ways in
which you learned in the process which
it seems like you're really focused on
your self- learning things which seems
really important at the same time I'm
sure that when you go into a room and
sit with someone and walk through how
they access things and you have maybe
Engineers who are working on the systems
that are paying attention I imagine they
get surprised and learn things too do
you have like examples of the kinds of
things that the colleagues you were
working with learned things from these
interview processes I remember the
feeling of having people get excited
about storyboards we've talked about
this I think in the past a little bit
the idea of just being able to Showcase
what you as the designer sees as the
experience of say a Rover planner or a
scientist in their environment looking
at a very specific interface reaching a
Breaking Point or something that the
tool isn't serving them in their
Challenge and then coming up with some
kind of solution in an actual like new
UI I remember the storyboards just
resonating I guess with that audience
because they just hadn't thought about
their process from that kind of
perspective you get these things called
bed sheets which are huge workflow
diagrams that really just articulate how
will this system be built out and
they're really just a lot of boxes and
arrows and it's very rich information
that the designer should also be aware
of but there's this other layer on top
of it of just like well how does a
person navigate between these
distributed systems do they have enough
information on the page to feel
confident that they're navigating
through that system efficiently in the
case of the scientists that were kind of
working on this how does input from that
team what kind of science intent that
they have how would that actually move
through the system that's a little bit
abstract and I can totally talk a little
bit more in detail on that but that
seemed to be the thing that kind of
resonated with people we weren't just
looking at boxes and arrows anymore we
were thinking about what is a person's
experience through those boxes and
arrows so for someone who's never seen
one before what is a storyboard so a
storyboard typically looks like you have
multi panels that just highlight these
significant events in a person's
workflow so the thing I was kind of
referring to is this idea of maybe a
scientist who is working on a team that
is trying to get data from the
spacecraft the storyboard could offer
like here are scientists that are able
to use a particular tool to articulate
what science they'd like to do that day
the next panel might show how that
information kind of goes to the Rover
planner to see if it's even feasible to
do can you actually drive to this
location can you actually extend the arm
to do this type of spectroscopy and so
the storyboard is just kind of outlining
an actual panel very much like a comic
strip essentially that helps people just
kind of Envision what you are seeing as
like the day in the life of that
scientist and collaboration with the r
planner in collaboration with the actual
software tool what's the workflow for
you actually creating these Comics I
guess is this like you go and talk to
them and get your sense of what the
process is and then you kind of on your
own go and draw it all out and show it
to them and it's your way of
communicating to them what you've
captured about what their workflows are
like essentially yeah I would say that
there is this process of when I'm
learning about a new domain for the
first time being able to have a
one-on-one conversation with a person
and actually drawing in real time with
them is definitely a part of the process
as well and just being able to put into
some tangible State what they're saying
so I can reflect it back to them is my
ultimate goal because what I want to do
is actually just simulate what they're
doing because a lot of of these domains
that I've worked with in they're not
entirely relatable experiences I'm not
an engineer and I'm not a robber planner
I'm not a scientist though that would be
cool um I'm none of these individuals so
in order for me to feel like I have a
good intuition and judgment around what
they're trying to do I need to recreate
that experience storyboards for me help
because they are these visual aids that
look like a comic strip they tell a
story that's sequential and it's a
really great communication tool for when
I do go back and follow up with that
person to just understand if I'm folling
along with what they're saying and if
it's something I can continue to
reference as I build out their system or
as I design their system are these
storyboards actually always sequential
when I think about the user interface
there's a certain Choose Your Own
Adventure part of it there are lots of
different paths you can take and
different things that you can do do you
sometimes include that in the
storyboards by having them fork and
merge to illustrate different path
through the system yes and I think when
I'm actually in the mode where I'm
translating something that a person's
doing with maybe a series of tools and
trying to consolidate into one nice
succinct workflow yeah I'm definitely
starting to Branch out into you could go
in so many different directions if you
land on this one page but I'm super
methodical and I tend to create very
linear patterns for these things just so
again I'm working often with these
complex workflows or there's some
elements to what an engineer is trying
to do that I might not be as familiar
with so I do try to lay it out very
linearly at first but for that kind of
complexity over time so in addition to
being a designer you're also an
illustrator and it sounds like this
actual physical process of drawing is a
big part of how you approach the
communication around it how do you
relate these two different parts of how
you think are they just one whole or are
these two different skills that you mix
together sometimes but not always how
does that all fit that's an interesting
question I think that it's one whole cuz
I just don't see them as different I
didn't think that drawing was going to
be this useful tool I suppose in my
career I assume that when I originally
went to school I really wanted to be an
architect and that seemed like a
complete onetoone of the skills that I
was passionate about and having a
practical application of them but I
didn't see that in some of the work that
especially like a place like JPL or Jane
Street I didn't see drawing as a tool
that would be helpful at least at that
point in my career I see it as a way of
just reflecting back to people and
showing a tangible evidence that I
understand something I just need to see
things and that's probably why I find
myself as a designer is I think that a
lot of times designers are offering the
skills to bring what could be a future
experience for someone or a future
reality into the present so that we can
kind of interrogate it and think about
like well is this actually going to be
useful should we test it with some
people are there other ways we can do
this I just feel like sometimes I just
need to be able to see what the future
is and drawing is my method for bringing
that into a present state where I can
actually make sense of it so for me it's
like sense making it's not even an
artistic expression it's just there's a
lot of things that I'm learning in these
domains and the best way to catch on to
what I'm observing what I'm hearing from
conversations with Engineers what I'm
seeing in just observing scientists that
are looking at the recent download of
data from a spacecraft drawing just
makes that real to me in a lot of ways
how Universal is this do other designers
who are also in the kind of the human
oriented design space is doing this in a
very drawing focused way a common
approach I would say that drawing
unfortunately gets a bad rap I think
that there's a lot of designers that
I've spoken with personally that are
very insecure about their drawing skills
and like they don't want that to be the
thing that makes or breaks their design
process and I certainly don't think that
it is that's my chosen method and has
been helpful for me I tend to encourage
everyone to draw though I think actually
the more messy the drawing the more
honest it is and just the more like I'm
trying to be in this space where I don't
know what the answer is but I need to
create some signal for another person to
help or another person add their opinion
so I feel like it's a very human method
I've seen it actually work quite well in
these environments that aren't entirely
human they're Engineers there's
Aerospace there's all these kind of
elements that don't really seem all that
relatable but if you can create some
drawings you can create an understanding
of what you're doing and connect more
with your colleagues and understand what
they're trying to achieve and to be fair
Engineers do a lot of drawing too
there's lots of people standing in front
of whiteboards trying to put up
structures that represent things about
designs and how systems fit together I
guess it tends to be less human oriented
you're drawing pictures of the human
using the thing and we usually draw like
the thing yes and also our drawing
skills are less good there's kind of
like layers right like I think that it's
actually fun to draw with Engineers
because they are often like here's the
underlying system and I feel like I
offer the layer on top of it of if this
is how we've built out the back end and
if this is how the data is supposed to
behave then there's this top layer of
what a person is going to see and that's
the part that I know is part of my lane
and what I'm trying to understand and
it's kind of interesting to draw with
people and I try to encourage my
engineering colleagues to do that
wherever we can so you've had a really
interesting and varied career as a
designer how'd you get here so honestly
the way I got here I hadn't heard of
James tree before it is not something
that we're not really big in the design
World we're not not yet not yet I hadn't
actually heard that they were looking
for a designer but I did have a friend
who knew someone who was working here
and she had told me Aaron there's a
place that you should probably consider
working for because there's a lot of
nerds that are trying to build out these
really complex systems it's perfect and
she was right and so I found out that
they were trying to hire a ux designer
and I was really skeptical the entire
time to be honest I just didn't
understand what would a design inue at a
quantitative trading firm or prop
trading firm the design space felt very
foreign to me and so I took on the
interview one because I wanted to work
with some people that were very smart
and interested in making complex systems
more manageable and useful certainly
that was one of it but I was also just
curious I just wanted to know more about
what would a designer do in an
environment that's thinking about the
Dynamics of our economy and what kind of
products would those teams be building
and because I didn't have words to
describe it even after researching it
and just looking into what James Street
is known for that made me even more
interested that I was like not wrapping
my head entirely around what the firm
was trying to do and I knew I needed to
talk to people who were working there to
demystify all of that and so I certainly
Ed my interview to basically understand
that and in so doing I met the team that
I was on and really enjoyed the Rapport
and the ways that they were envisioning
bringing design into their work and
having a design CL culture so now that
you've gone through that process can you
articulate that a little more clearly
why does Jane Street want to hire ux
designers I think that we're discovering
that some of the older methods of
building tools internally might not
scale well into the future and what I
mean by that is we want to have better
integrated tools and we want to have an
experience for people where they don't
have to guess too much on what they're
doing when they land on a new internal
tool and I think that that does start
with how are multiple people using it
not just one engineer who created the
tool and like we maybe create some
documentation people can train up on it
maybe that worked at a certain point of
maturity in The Firm but I don't think
that at any point people were not aware
of the user experience the more I work
with engineers and see their process I
was really pleasantly surprised when I
started that there was already an
interest in fing up with users and there
were dedicated channels to collect
feedback from people in the moment but
there was this awareness that maybe they
can do a better job and I think part of
this is just a matter of scale as you
have more people The Leverage you get
from really improving and tuning the
interface that you provide people just
gets bigger and bigger when I started at
Jam Street there were like 35 people or
something like that now there's 2,600
and so the amount of Leverage that you
get by making things simpler to use
simpler to discover is Big there's also
just way more stuff to learn and so
having more of the things that you come
across and need to use as part of your
job be really easy to pick up and use
when the firm was smaller we just built
much less stuff so you have a big
complicated system with lots of
interconnections between different teams
and you want to keep the cross terms
down the amount that you pay for all of
these extra connections you want to get
value from all the things people build
without it being as much friction for
people and you mentioned that people
already cared about this kind of user
experience question which I think is
right but another aspect of it it's not
just about having someone who's
dedicated to it but there's a real
expertise that comes in and just
understanding the approach this whole
idea of sitting down with end users and
watching what they're doing it's in some
sense just obvious that you should do it
but it also feels kind of silly and
wasteful in time and stuff and I think
having talked to a bunch of people
who've been through some of these
processes with you people are surprised
by how much they learn through this and
stuff that they thought was going to be
like super obvious and of course people
will understand this you look in actual
life what happens when people pick up
the tool and realize oh man they are
holding it wrong so yeah and I think
that's one of the values that comes from
having people who've just done this
before that was probably the very first
month of Jane Street for me not only
learning about the domain itself and
learning what do Traders actually do for
the first project that I jumped into
there's a tool that we're using to
ensure that we have the right settings
for meetings and you're able to have the
appropriate audio setting and the
appropriate video conferencing tool and
we're using a separate open- Source tool
that helps people have the preferred low
latency audio experience that they want
there was this effort to really sit down
with people and actually watch them use
this tool encouraging them to create
their own meeting and have me just
Shadow them as they go to a specific
room try and initiate their meeting from
there being able to kind of see like
where in the UI did they get messed up
or tripped on what are the certain
things on the UI that they felt like
they were having issues and
understanding and seeing that in real
time documenting it videotaping it and
then sharing it with the engineering
team was really insightful for them yeah
and the whole thing of having a meeting
seems like such a simple thing yeah we
just want to go into a room and hit a
button and have a meeting and like have
a meeting with some people who are here
in the New York office and some people
who are in London and maybe some people
who are remote dialing in from their
home office and having that whole thing
work it's not nearly as simple as it
should be and we did a bunch of work on
our side we have different requirements
than like the average user of Zoom both
in like the size of the meetings and the
latency requirements on the audio and a
bunch of other things that mean that a
lot of the external Solutions just
weren't a really good match here and
from my perspective I feel like over you
know years as we built this out and
worked on it I got to really experience
how this thing that should be simple
kind of wasn't it was hard to get all
the pieces to work and there's a lot of
careful thought and effort that happened
over the course of years of Machining
that process down and making it smoother
and simpler to cute things like
attaching things to the wall that you
could scan with your phone so that your
phone could know what room you're in and
actually dial in the right meeting in
the right place now it's just delightful
I feel like as a regular basis like I
walk and I think oh this stuff is so
nice like I walk and I hardly have to
think I hit a single button and it
basically does the thing that I want and
the thing that can be lost between that
relatively simple experience is how much
work is required to make the thing
actually simple
absolutely I think that was the tricky
thing for me when I started which is
where do we need to simplify it when I
first saw the mobile UI I had immediate
assumptions on like what were the things
that needed to be improved I think one
of the things specifically was just
there were so many different ways that
you could start your meeting it wasn't
just one simple button which we've kind
of evolved into now or very easy way to
find other options but at the time
everything on the UI was just the same
hierarchy and the same color and
organization on the page and for a
person who had never done this before
and was maybe used to some of these
external tools it was hard to know like
where they needed to start and it was
hard to engage them in a way that they
felt pretty confident that they were
going to make it to a very important
meeting or be able to have the ability
to hear their colleagues and see them at
the same time and so these things that
do seem simple and have been resolved in
the past are made like we are
integrating a little bit of complexity
with this kind of low latency tooling
that fits for our very specific use case
of allowing traders to feel like they're
actually on the same tra floor together
and to do that it did require actually
meeting with people and not just coming
up with designs that were just adopting
the same patterns that we had seen in
other tools or experienced with other
tools so I expect part of the process of
doing all of this was teaching people
within the team that you were working on
how to approach these problems with a
new set of intellectual tools and I'm
curious how did that go right there's a
lot of teaching people how to do new
things convincing them it's worthwhile
to spend time on this and you're coming
into a domain where they already know
how to build software they feel like
they know how to build these tools what
was the process like of getting the
engineers around you to take part in a
full way in this kind of design process
I feel like I was lucky because I feel
like the engineers just recognize that
there's like a whole other dimension to
their system that they maybe didn't have
as much expertise or experience building
out which is the ux that's something
that kind of comes at the end from what
I gather for a lot of Engineers where
it's like you think deeply about how the
system should work how should it
function and then oh yeah we should
probably make a UI so that people can
use it that's like kind of a gross
oversimplification but I think that it
seemed as though and from what I've
experienced even elsewhere like knowing
how to integrate that collaboration
between building a functional product
but that also people want to use and
find useful is always something that we
have to adapt and figure out as a team I
feel lucky because I think people were
very receptive to it and they were very
interested to know like what do you need
to do to make something more use user
friendly yes it was very much oh
whenever we were presenting new features
or we were identifying like the tool for
the conferencing there were a lot of
things on their road map that people
were interested in building out new
functionality that they wanted to see
and I felt like through asking questions
around like well do people need this
have you received a lot of insight from
like our help channels of people
requesting this feature what does the
tool do now and how do people navigate
through that today we should maybe have
some kind of insight into like what are
people doing before we actually assign
any kind of priority on like what we
want to build out next I felt like by
asking those questions that reminded the
team that there's going to be people
using the tool who are not in this room
and actively hearing some of our
reasoning for adding this feature those
people exist and we should try and think
about what they would want is the first
step just like generating awareness of
it yeah in some sense that all sounds
like a much better experience than I
would have expected I just feel like
it's really I one thing I could say I
think this is actually more recent I've
actually noticed that I've had to adapt
some of my own research methods to the
ways that we are building out these
tools so I'm used to setting up these
meetings with people where we can sit
down and look at the tool together and
just go through a set of tasks and see
in real time like how are they able to
use the latest build of our tool
together and I will take notes
diligently on like what it is that is
breaking in the UI what is not very very
understandable I'm used to this very
methodical process where you are sitting
with a person in that moment and what
I've kind of noticed in some of the
projects that I've done recently is that
those methods have worked and there's an
interest in the engineering team to
continue those discussions but they've
actually wanted to have more discussions
with users I've had to like break out of
some of my more methodical approaches to
research and actually adapt some of the
cultural elements of Jan Street into the
research and what I mean by that is like
going up to people in the moment and
asking them like oh we've noticed that
you logged into this product and I'm
just kind of curious like what your
experience has been like and asking them
in real time as they're working through
the latest build to talk about their
methods versus the more organized
research efforts that I would do it
feels kind of now like we're actually
trying to find even more lightweight
ways to gather information as the
person's using the tool and how does
that tie into what you see as the
culture of the firm like why culturally
that more ad hoc lightweight stuff seem
more preferable it all depends I guess
also on the state of that product I
would say that when we're first building
out something in it's Green Field it's
good to just meet with people oneon-one
but what I was noting with this cultural
element is that there is this
environment at Jane Street that I've
noticed as I'm working through designing
internal tools where people are really
receptive to communication and having
like these casual moments where we catch
one another in the hall or we are able
to stop by one another's desk I'm used
to environments where it's a little bit
more formal and in some ways where you
need to set up actual meetings or
establish these very distinct points of
communication but I think that there's
actually an opportunity to learn even
more about what people are doing when
you're able to see them in context and
actually meet with them and establish a
kind of relationship of who that person
is what they're trying to do with the
tool and like where they might be
running into some kind of issue and I
felt like that was more of a cultural
thing and it kind of makes it almost
even more approach for designers to
enter into this space there's this
environment that's actually quite
welcoming to talking about the domain
and showing what they're trying to do
with their software which I think
ensures that a designer who's coming
completely from the outside is able to
practice that domain and learn the
language and feel empowered to connect
with their end users so I feel like
that's a jam Street Experience that I've
had and I've been wanting to adapt my
approach to research around it's
interesting I think of that as a
cultural thing this very kind of free in
communication style but it's also like a
cultural thing that's reinforced by
architecture the way we lay out the
people is like we have these big trading
floors with lots of people all pretty
physically close to each other and I
think the reason we've wanted that from
the beginning is all about communication
about making it really cheap to talk to
someone who's next to you and I think
that's the thing that I've noticed over
many years is that it's really
surprising how big of an effect of small
differences and ease of communication is
to how people behave we periodically
reorganize where people sit and move
groups around and some of that's cuz we
have to the firm is growing you need to
move things and sometimes it's just good
to mix things up because you move two
groups like closer to each other and two
other groups farther away and it just
changes the communication pattern in a
really surprising way oh absolutely yeah
and there's actually this new feature
that we had added to our help slack
channel that there's a channel that's
just alerting us when a person logs into
the tool and we get their username and
we can easily find where they are in the
office and we can go up and talk to them
one of the engineers on the team added a
very rough estimation of how close they
are to you so it'll tell you oh this
person's right around the corner like
this person is 54 M away from you or
this person is like two floors above you
and so I don't know even just like
knowing where they're located and having
an awareness of oh I just like walk by
there is a lot of connection you can
build and I feel like the design itself
becomes just Stronger by having that
constant iteration that is informed by
these discussions with real users so
tools for meetings are a good example of
a tool that's used very broadly no one
is an expert in having meetings
sometimes I feel like I'm an expert in
having meetings but that's my own
problem but there are lot of tools that
we're building that are tools that are
really focused for experts and in many
ways I think a lot of what we need from
the ux side of things is like you were
doing at Boeing building cockpits right
Building Systems designed for people who
are expert in the field that are often
focused on presenting information in a
really dense and efficient way and
pretty different from what you might
expect from a consumer software kind of
environment can you say a little bit
more about some of the projects that
you've worked on that are a little bit
more in that space there's a few
projects that I'm working on the one
that actually I just mentioned that has
the ability to know like who's logged in
is a tool called blueprint which is a
tool that's allowing people to manage
and provision their applications in a
more standard Consolidated system so
that's one of the things that I'm
designing for another is a tool called
APD which is helping people basically
Run apps and jobs like automated
procedures that maintain the
functionality of their systems and then
we have a lot of the observability work
so we're thinking about these
distributed systems that we're building
out and we want to have a solution
internally that allows us to have better
visibility into the performance across
all of the different systems that your
app might be interfacing with those are
like some of the main tools that are
kind of outside of the realm of
relatable workflows I feel like there
are experience that I've had remotely
that have been cumbersome with some of
our own video conferencing tools so I
can pull from that sort of working
schema of mine but when it comes to
things like maybe automating a certain
job or to run at a very specific time of
the day these experiences are outside of
my realm of what I tend to do and what I
do as a designer and that does require
interfacing a lot more with the actual
Engineers who are using the tools to
understand what they're trying to
achieve and how the current systems are
not serving their needs I I think
actually this has been a lot of how I
think about the development of how we've
built tools for people over time is
early on we were all able to rely on the
fact that we're essentially building
tools for ourselves right you'd build a
tool and you would use it and other
people would use it but you were always
very close to the use case and then as
the organization grows and there's a
wider diversity of different kinds of
things you need to do and there's just
more expertise in different Corners you
end up designing things for people whose
jobs aren't that much like yours that's
a whole different discipline of how do
you figure out what some other person
want and you can't anymore rely on the
stuff that's just in your head it just
changes everything dramatically yeah it
definitely takes you out of your comfort
zone I suppose so are there ways in
which like designs and like the
principles behind the designs are
different when you think about these
kind of focused expert tools versus when
you think about building tools for more
occasional casual use I'm thinking a
little bit about like I look out at
consumer tools and there's a certain
sameness I feel like to lots of
different broadly focused of like a
certain Airy prettiness and dist
between the different UI components and
stuff that shows up there and it feels
like there's a set of things that people
are optimizing for about stickiness and
making it really easy for people to get
into the new thing that all feels very
different from what you want to optimize
for when you're building a tool for
someone every day they're coming in and
doing their job deeply integrated with
this tool how does that like difference
in goals affect the way the designs work
out the airiness of our consumer
products is definitely something that
I've certainly designed systems around
the past it is all about being very
thoughtful about how you introduce
information to the end user over the
course of their full experience with a
tool it's so different at a place where
I'm working with people that are used to
information-rich tools or things that
are just you want to have an awareness
of all the information you have access
to all at one time and I think the
principles I'm still calibrating in a
lot of ways it has been a culture shock
in a lot of ways to hear people say like
oh I actually want to see everything on
my screen this font is far too big or I
don't like that there's so much white
space in this area this actually makes
me nervous we could fill that with more
information like that's that is a very
common piece of feedback that I get and
a lot of individuals are just when I
come to them with a figma prototype of
potential direction that we might take I
have a lot of memories of some of my
initial conversations with people just
wanting to make things more compact
wanting to know like is there any more
information that I could see for this
state of this job or this app like I
want to know what I have access to and
I'd also like it to be responsive
because I'm going to make it super small
on my screen and push it off to like the
left- hand side and you know one of four
monitors that I'm using so their
environment is like very different from
what I think I would design for if I was
creating an experience for an average
consumer yeah it's maybe worth painting
a picture of what a typical workstation
looks like here there's almost a bare
you know human rights minimum you have
to have at least two monitors someone on
a trading this might have four or six
and people who are doing jobs that
involve intense live monitoring of
things typically have these monitors
painted over with many little boxes each
is a different view into a different
system that they're watching and they're
all like blinking lights and noises
going on lots of noises infinite noises
Traders move to our floor and now I get
to hear the cacophony of things
happening I'm always curious what they
mean but yeah and when I think of like
what are the prototypical user
interfaces that people really dive into
and use a lot there things like a
spreadsheet which is you know dense
grids full of constantly changing
numbers they're text editors people vary
a little bit on exactly how intensely
they feel this way but suddenly there
are lots of people who are like get rid
of all the Chrome I just want like as
many lines of code as I can get on my
screen at the same time and then the
other one is the terminal where again
the terminal is simple and functional
and you know lots of a very dense
presentation of data and I love all of
those things and I think they're all
very useful but for a long time Jam
Street operated this whole web thing had
never
happened it just doesn't exist that's
right like we didn't know how to use it
and we mostly didn't try and I think
there's a lot of Virtues to the kind of
tools that I was just talking about but
there are also profound limitations you
know at some point in our Evolution we
had I don't know five million lines of
code in our code base but not the
ability to draw a straight line right
the
ability right very limited ability to do
visualizations certainly in a kind of
programmatic way and another way in
which I think these kind of user
interfaces tend to be impoverished is
they're not very good at providing you
help just the basic affordance of a tool
tip is Magic right it's just like an
incredibly simple and useful way to
provide people information at the place
exactly where they need it I love emac
but it's not good at that kind of thing
and so in some sense I think those are
why we cared so much about putting more
and more stuff into web uis as a way of
kind of delivering user interfaces you
also give something up there's something
valuable about the like spreadsheet and
text editor and terminal world I'm kind
of curious how you think about the
trade-offs between those different ways
of building experiences for end users I
know you are not primarily a command
line Dennis no but I feel like I've had
more experience learning to navigate
through the command line the appd tool
is a command line interface right now
the goal is to actually take what exists
and turn it into a web experience that
provides people better integration with
other web applications that can help you
build some context around is your app
functioning correctly it's probably not
a good description of it but yeah for me
I'm following you APD feels like kind of
like the tool that's related to some of
the trade-offs that we have to think
about between a command line and a web
experience so like one of the nice
things about terminals as a way to
surface uis is they give you very few
choices which is like a weird thing to
think is good right isn't it good to
have more choices but one of the nice
things especially inside of an
organization that's really bad on
average at visual
design is that you can't spend a lot of
time deciding which font you want to use
and what is the size of the font and
what's the width of the bevel you have
no choice of fonts and there is no bevel
you're kind of forced to only think
about how am I going to put together
this array of characters in order to get
across the thing I want to get across
and there's a degree to which
constraining the design space gets
better things out the other end I think
if you give people who aren't really
good at free R design web UI you're
going to get a lot of eye bleeding bad
designs that are like confusing and hard
to use what I've seen from some
translation away from a CLI to the web
experience is you just take the like
command line at the bottom and you bring
it into a web experience and that is
just the one place that you go for
navigation things kind of just behave as
if you were in a CLI but you're actually
in like a browser and a web browser
itself that's a way to go it's not
really taking full advantage I guess of
like some of the other things you can do
I've definitely seen I know we have some
uis that operate that way and there are
parts of that where I look and see it's
like a thing that looks like a command
line I'm like oh now I feel
comfortable being able to like just
maintain your hands on the keyboard at
all times is just like another user
Behavior I suppose that I've also just
become a lot more cognizant of as I'm
designing things so in addition to if
you are finding yourself kind of
translating away from a command line
interface where you can really just
navigate the entire thing through key
bindings and just using your keyboard
being able to have a UI that's a web UI
specifically that has very clear
Direction on which keybinds you can use
and an ease of use from the keyboard
it's like something that is now very
much a part of my Approach now or a set
of principles I suppose that I kind of
refer back to as I design more
experiences within Jan Street and I
sometimes look back at even some of the
things that I made in my first 6 months
at the firm and I'm aware now of how
complicated they could potentially be
for someone who just used to using their
keyboard I'm already starting to build a
slightly more in tune awareness around
like what does it mean to have a good
user experience for this population of
users right and maybe it's forth the
thinging the reason why we care so much
about keyboard interfaces is because
they're just dramatically faster you
look at someone using a spreadsheet or
an editor they reach to touch their
Mouse and you want to slap their hand
it's like don't do that cuz it's just so
much lighter in the end you get the set
of sequences of keystrokes wired into
your neurons and it just makes things go
go go in a much smoother way again for
an expert right for someone who has been
using the tool for a long time they can
be in that state of flow where they can
just almost effortlessly move really
quickly through the user interface and
that's really great I think that's one
of the bigger challenges that I've had
with working with a user community that
predominantly works just on the keyboard
is yeah how do you still translate that
ease of use that they have right now
with their command line interfaces to a
web application there's some things that
are going to be completely different
with the web UWI but for the things that
are standard if you're going to change
the status of something if there's like
a set of actions that people are used to
doing and they have a critical impact on
your system those need to behave in the
way that they expect and that they've
experienced already in their command
line interface I think the stakes are
high when we're trying to offer a web
experience in lie of a known command
line interface making sure that there is
a accurate interpretation of what people
actually need to take action via their
keyboard and making sure that's
reflected properly in the web UI is
incredibly important and if we don't do
it right that just leads people to not
want to adopt that tool and so I feel
like there's a lot of additional work
that I feel I need to do in the very
beginning stages to prioritize that
translation of critical key binding to
the web UI so that there isn't a drop
off of users from feeling like they'll
just continue to tolerate maybe a system
that's not scaling well to their
evolving workflows and what they need as
a team I feel like you would learn a lot
about how people think about keyboard
interfaces if you studi the three
editors we support there's like vim emac
and vs code and each of them have
dramatically different philosophies it's
a very interesting space the other thing
that I think is interesting about the
editor space text editors in particular
are tools for experts by experts you
know these tools were like the designed
in the' 70s many of them and like in
many ways aren't that different from the
original versions that were in the70s I
mean they've grown in lots of ways but a
lot of the core idioms around which
they're built are preserved from those
early designs it was sort of the
opposite of human oriented design or
something it was just some Engineers who
wanted something and they built the
things that they wanted and that is a
different way of getting humans in the
mix but it's this interesting question
of when you think about designing tools
for experts this whole thing of
interviewing people and trying to
understand their workflow seems very
important but at the same time this
expert insight into like what are the
workflows and how do you design ways of
interacting that really match those
workflows tightly one of the questions
I'm interested in is how do we
effectively integrate those two kinds of
insights together to build really
excellent tools for experts that both
capture what's unique about the domain
and also leverage these broader insights
about how to design things I think about
that as being one of the bigger
challenges of my probably design career
at Jane Street for sure it's just I have
an awareness that there are a lot of
tools that we've been able to build out
because enough people found existing
systems to be problematic and so they
just created a new one enough people
have trained up on it and enough people
learned how to use the tool and their
content and I think that for me I know
I'll never be an engineer I'll never be
a Trader that is not the scope of work
that I can provide but the big challenge
for me is how can you actually still
understand their domain enough to have
that kind of intuition or build up a
little bit more of that empathy around
what these experts are experiencing I
can't say that I figured out how to do
that I will say that the experiences
I've had at JPL this first year at Jan
Street it does feel kind of like being
immersed in that environment and having
these conversations with people where
I'm able to observe in real time what
they are actually doing and see exactly
how they're trying to integrate these
different tools into their workflow
that's the thing I'm like most
interested in learning more about yeah
it's hard stuff so you've obviously
spent your time working on a bunch of
concrete design projects but another
thing that you're thinking about is how
to build out design as a discipline here
and growing that team you are a ux
designer here you're also currently the
only ux designer here and we're actively
looking to add more people to that team
and I'm curious like how are you
thinking about this process of trying to
find people what do you think we should
be looking for in finding people who
would be a good match for the kind of
problems and who' be excited about
working here yeah we're actively looking
for another user experience designer
that's excited about learning about this
particular domain and has already the
skill set and experience of building out
and shipping products for people and
that already started to like use some of
their designs they have that experience
of making decisions on a tool putting it
out into the world and seeing what kind
of response from their user Community
they can use to like improve their
system so I feel like the individuals
that we're looking for were certainly
interested in people with user
experience design background but we're
looking for a lot of designers who have
demonstrated an ability to be in a
domain that's not as familiar so
certainly a number of people that we've
had conversations with have had
experience in like the fintech world
there are people who have maybe worked
in Aerospace there's a couple of
individuals that I've spoken to that are
familiar with robotics and
are going through that same kind of
process of how do you partner with
experts to build complex tools so
essentially are you looking for people
who had the experience of building for
people who are experts in things that
they themselves are not experts in I
would say so we see a future where
there's actually a lot more diversity of
designers from all sorts of different
disciplines I think that's like the
ideal situation is just to have a
variety of perspectives to inform what
people are trying to do and build out
designs you know in collaboration with
our engineers and Traders but for now we
are kind of looking to see if there are
individuals who are able to kind of jump
into a really difficult and complex
domain and clarify like what needs to
get designed and clarify exactly what
the challenges are for people that are
working on these types of tools so
that's what you're looking for in the
people that you want to find what do you
think should make Jane Street an
exciting place for a designer to come
work at what's a unique opportunity here
my sense is that you get to just go a
lot deeper into what an experience is
like for an individual who's going to
use your end product I think that this
is the one place where I've had the most
latitude to just go up to individuals
talk with them about the tools that
they're working on understand more on
like how tools that I'm designing for
can be improved and subsequently I've
just learned a lot about systems we've
built out and I found myself navigating
through those systems on a command line
interface which I never thought I would
have to do in my career I always thought
that I would just kind of live in this
design research space and think at a
high level on like what things need to
happen and never would I Venture into
the depths of how it was built out but
in creating these relationships with my
colleagues and learning what people
actually need from their tools I see it
as like this need for designers to go
even deeper in their understanding of
what they're actually building and there
are times at other firms other agencies
these places that I worked at in the
past where you don't get that much
collaboration with your engineering
counterparts and you do have to just
kind of live in this place in the
product life cycle where you don't
really know how this thing is going to
get built out and you just inform what a
person would need and I think that I've
had much more exposure to like this more
holistic process of how we actually make
a functional tool and like what are some
of the things that people will run into
what challenges people will run into
with that new system like I just feel
like I have a lot more more access to
that than I have in any other place and
there's almost a culture here that's
excited to help you navigate that space
some of the things that I've done
especially like command light interface
are learning a little bit more on like
how we architect these distributed
systems all of those things are pretty
foreign and just outside of my scope of
knowledge but there is a lot of
individuals here that are very happy to
sit and talk through that and share
their knowledge in a way that doesn't
feel at all judgmental and it doesn't
feel like has this negative impact on
their productivity they see it as an
opportunity to make another team member
more informed of what they're building
and in so doing have a deeper empathy
into what they can produce what they can
Implement versus what are some of the
things that we can't do yet I don't have
that kind of reach when I'm just a
designer either working on my own thing
or on some of these other past teams
right it sounds like to me there's two
things you're pointing out here one is
you get a chance to go deep in the
domain so if you're the kind of person
who really likes geeking out and
understanding the details of stuff you
wouldn't normally get a chance to dig
into that's an exciting thing and the
other thing it's just highly
collaborative with the engineering team
you're not making a design on the
outside and saying here are some
specifications of things to do you're
kind of working back and forth with the
people who are building the system on
that latter point I sort of Wonder like
how do you even do it the other way it
seems really hard to like design a thing
where you're not working closely with
the engineering team because I feel like
if you're just kind of Designing what
you want the thing to be the world kind
of seems very wide open there's lots you
know this is what the ideal user user
flow would look like there are lots of
constraints about what's easier and
harder to do and I feel like a lot of
the art of Designing great software is
figuring out a thing which is
simultaneously simple for the end user
and also simple to implement Simplicity
is like a profound value both in design
and in software engineering finding that
kind of middle point where you can be
simple on both dimensions at once I feel
like requires a lot of collaboration and
understanding you said a lot of nice
things about what it's been like working
here and doing design here but what has
been the hardest part of adapting to the
kind of work we do here I think the
hardest thing that I've had to deal with
is maybe just accepting some of the
limitations that I have as a person
that's not deeply embedded in a domain
to the same degree is the end users that
I'm designing for I feel like I have
experienced this in other like very
technical complex domains that I've
worked with but there is something about
being in an environment at this point
this particular point in Jam Street's
just interesting because I feel like
people are still used to like creating
tools when they need them and having a
shared knowledge across other Engineers
that they work with to just train up and
use that tool there's sort of an ease to
making sense of these domains that I
think for myself it can actually be
quite challenging I don't write code I
don't build out my prototypes I use all
of that is done for me in figma and I
think that the hardest part for me is
being in a world that's like
transitioning away from what they're
used to which is being able to kind of
spin up tools as they need and then
going towards a world that actually
there's holistic user experience for
tools and there's an understanding that
the end users have very different
expectations for like a web experience
and maybe sometimes even a preference to
have a web experience over something
like an existing CLI although my hope is
that we don't like totally give up on
that flexibility of just kind of
spinning things up we've been using
command line tools for a long time I
don't expect that to actually stop one
of the things I think is like one of the
kind of big quite open challenges in
building graphical user interfaces is
how do you share some of the benefits
that you get from more traditional more
language oriented tools I think the
thing that's great about command line
tools is they're organized around words
rather than pictures and there's a kind
of composability to language a grammar
that you have for how you can construct
things on the Unix command line the
nicest part of it is this like pipe
operator the ability to like run a bunch
of commands and pipe output from one to
the other and the whole system has been
engineered so that there's like a kind
of standard way in which you represent
data or a few standard ways in which you
represent data and it's like just easy
and light and natural to take a bunch of
different tools that were built not
necessarily explicitly to work with each
other but with a kind of shared set of
idioms and values and then you can just
put them all together and make something
new in a like pretty simple and pretty
lightweight way and there are limits to
how well those user experiences work you
don't get tool tips but you get this
profound composability
and I'd love to see a world where we had
graphical user interfaces that retained
some of that composability and I like I
don't quite know how to do it I think
it's actually a hard problem something
about having this kind of linguistic
aspect not be totally lost is something
that I'd like to see there I don't know
I'm curious if you've thought about this
kind of composability question as you
start stepping into tools like blueprint
and APD that are more about connecting
lots of technical pieces together this
kind of extensibility like how do you
retain that I haven't really thought as
extensively about this I guess the way
that I kind of approached building out
these tools for like APD and blueprint
right now is like there are things that
you can communicate through consistent
navigation consistent layout of a page
that can like help a person make sense
of the information in front of them
graphically without having to kind of
read through again like I don't really
use that much of these command light
interfaces so I don't entirely always
know like what it feels like to have
something that you can actually like
read out and understand what the program
is going to do but there are certain
patterns and elements of consistency
that I'm trying to infuse in the designs
that I'm building out for not just like
APD and blueprint but even for like some
of the newer tools that we're seeing
emerge for like some of our
observability platform applications and
I think that that maybe is like the way
of having some I don't know if you can
really like spin up things and like have
your own applications but if people are
trying to build out user interfaces or
extend maybe from something that's
already been built out there could be
like user patterns that we've already
identified as being helpful and we've
utilized across appd and blueprint that
maybe someone else could use for their
own tooling and reuse I guess there is
an interest and like taking a lot of the
design system work that we had done
early on of like creating these
consistent components consistent buttons
the right kind of coloring and when you
have like a certain button State there's
consistent states that you would see all
of that can actually be kind of packaged
up into something that can be reused if
you were interested in building out your
own web application ideally in the
future you would have all these
components ready for you to pull in and
actually build out your experience yeah
for sure there's like some important
kind of composability that comes roughly
at the level of widgets where you build
a widget that has not just the right
visual presentation but the right
Behavior baked into it in a way that you
can then hook that into other pieces and
like there's a lot of work we've done on
the kind of web programming side to make
that kind of component stuff really good
the thing that I feel like is hard to do
is this kind of cross tool compatibility
of like you built a tool and you built a
tool and you built a tool and now you
want to like hook all those tools
together I've seen some patterns that I
think work reasonably well one of the
things that like some of the trading
desks have done is they might have one
tool that decides where their focus is
what's the particular security that they
are paying attention to and then maybe a
bunch of other tools in the back end you
know that tool will publish that
information the other tools can watch it
and then like something changes and like
all of your tools even though they were
implemented independently will all kind
of change focus at the same time to pay
attention to the new thing you're doing
so that's like one way of getting things
to hook together another thing I feel
like I've seen done but I don't know if
I've ever seen it done well is there the
some kind of tools where you try and
have a dual life to the UI so there's
these cool like dashboarding apps where
you can like click some buttons and
create some views and create some
buttons and create some sources of data
that pull different sources of data and
kind of create a visualization that then
people can like watch and interact with
and it's a really easy way to get
started up but then you might want to be
like okay but now what if I want to turn
that into a textual representation that
I can like edit in a different way and
commit to a source code repository and
so like having like this dynamically
constructed structure of the UI live a
double life where you can flip it from a
purely graphical specification into like
oh yeah here are the five components you
have combined here's a definition of
those components and then you could go
in like edit and transform it or even
programmatically generate those so I
feel like that's like a kind of thing
that you see like little versions of
that another actually good example is
like you have all sorts of uis for doing
filtering your issue tracker or whatever
has some way of filtering and sometimes
you can have something where there's
like a SQL like query language let you
do it and sometimes there are UI where
you can like click buttons to say filter
down to this filter down to that or
whatever and one thing you can do is you
can have like the set of buttons that
you do could behind the scenes be like
constructing the SQL query that
represents the filter and then have this
way of flipping back and forth between
the two
representations so you're both a ux
designer and an artist and I'm curious
how do you think about the role of
Beauty in ux design oh
God I mean that's probably the best
response to it I'm always like trying to
avoid the concept that like the designer
has come to the engineering team and
their role is to help make the UI pretty
I think that's like a shorthand for a
lot of people that it's not entirely
like dismissive I think that for people
pretty is actually a term that means
like it's clear it makes sense it makes
a person feel confident that they know
what to do when they arrive at the
Landing page of an interface I do
sometimes feel like it's also like a
shorthand for like you as a designer can
come in at the end and not have any
insight into the domain and still do
your job I'm sure you can come in at the
end and like put a nicer polish to
everything and it will all work out this
is something that the designer doesn't
need to be embedded in any way into the
thinking and the functionality and like
what this tool should do for a person
and so Beauty has just been this really
tricky element to my design process I
don't think that this is the case for a
lot of other designers I've had
conversations with people about the idea
of like making things pretty that kind
of quote or that term and it doesn't
seem to bother people as much I think
that for me it just kind of erases like
a very important element to the design
process where you can't get to something
that's clear and beautiful without
really understanding what it should be
and having an awareness of like the
complexities of it I don't think that
you can just like be brought into
building out a tool and just like polish
it like you need to actually understand
the mechanics of what it is what
environment it exists within there's
almost something dismissive about
talking about being pretty because it's
just like putting a Fresh coat of paint
on a thing and I think that it can like
really limit what you build out and the
kind of collaboration you can really
have with a person like a design who's
coming on to your team to codify like
what it is a person's trying to do into
something that we can actually interact
with on a screen there's a little bit
but there's something about picking the
right clear and simple way of presenting
data and presenting your options and
doing it in a way that like I don't know
something about the visual appeal I feel
like does matter at a functional level
the way in which humans see and interact
with things I think makes some kind of
difference but it's complicated and very
subjective right I think so subjective I
think think that's probably the thing
that makes it hard a lot of the time for
me to actually think about beauty as
like its own isolated thing when I am
designing interfaces there are patterns
and best practices for color treatments
and font sizes that you'll see on like a
screen but I I very rarely am like
prioritizing it it's almost like I will
just take those patterns that already
exist and really put a lot more of my
effort into making sure I've fully
understood what people are trying to do
and like how can you use all those
pieces to kind of like orchestrate that
desired experience is not the primary
thing that you're thinking about it's
not even like a compliment at times a
lot of people are always like oh wow
this like interface is so much prettier
now or like oh I just really enjoy using
this tool it's pretty if they don't
mention like the usability part that's
usually where I'm like oh you say it's
pretty but tell me more about whether or
not it's actually helping you the
problem that I'm most interested in is
whether or not it's actually useful and
if it's actually something that people
care about incorporating into their
day-to-day work for me that would be the
beautiful thing is like oh this once
really tedious and problematic workflow
that a person has like tolerated for
years is now made much more approachable
or it's so much easier to just kind of
pick up and use that is I think the
definition of Beauty for me and I but I
often feel like beauty comes in this
like kind of aesthetic sort of
interpretation or like what we see is
like the only only thing that designers
are able to produce but I think to even
get to that point where it's like clear
and engaging and something that people
want to use and actually is
transformative to their workflow there's
a lot of work that goes into that that
you can't do without being able to dive
into that domain pretty is very much for
me like this kind of byproduct of really
understanding what you're building well
that seems like a great note to end on
thank you so much for joining me thank
you so much this is
great you'll find a complete transcript
of the episode along with links to some
of the things that we discussed at
signals and threads.com thanks for
joining us and see you next time